The Dorian Principle, a biblical response to the commercialization of Christianity by
Conley Owens, Chapter 3, the Triangle of Obligation, Inmedia-C versus Indirection.
I was 23 years old and I never met my Lolo.
That's the Tagalog word for grandfather.
Several factors, including the entimely death of my mother, his daughter, as well as
his roots in the Philippines left us distant and without common ties.
Driving a stereo-less Honda Accord and armed with the return address on a letter I had
received 12 years prior, I set off on a 2,400 mile road trip with the hope of connecting
with them.
The overall journey had a larger purpose.
I was moving from Virginia to California, but this was an essential side quest.
As I investigated the neighborhood, I discovered the house had belonged to a sister.
Some of the neighbors were still in touch with her, and she was able to give me a touch
with him.
He only visited the United States a few weeks a year, and by God's providence it just
so happened that he would be arriving shortly.
When the time came, I was equipped with the new address, and headed off to meet my Lolo.
It was a sweet reunion, if first time meetings between relatives may be called reunions.
I not only had the privilege of meeting him, but several other relatives, including his
oldest son, my uncle, Titoji.
Titoji's hospitality was fantastic.
He housed me for several days, and hardly a moment passed where food was not being prepared
or offered to me.
In part, this is par for the course in Filipino homes, but as I spoke with him, I learned that
he felt the need to treat me well in order to honor my mother, the sister he had never
met.
Needless to say, that weekend remains one of the most memorable in my life.
Titoji considered himself obligated to me, but only indirectly so.
Rather than an immediate or direct indebtedness, his felt obligation toward me.
Was mediated through my late mother.
Visually, we might picture this as a triangle.
In the first two chapters, we saw that both Jesus and Paul forbid receiving ministerial support
out of a direct obligation, reciprocity, but encouraged support that arises out of a
mediated obligation, co-labor.
This ethic, the Dorian principle, fits into the same sort of triangle.
I would like to use that notion of mediated obligation as a lens by which we will examine
a broader collection of examples.
Specifically, in 1 Corinthians 9, Paul reinforces this principle of co-labor through several
analogies to ministry fundraising.
Let's take a look at these and see how this pattern takes shape.
The priesthood.
The last analogy that Paul employs is in many ways the most direct of the lot.
According to the Apostle, the general principles of ministerial maintenance in Old Testament
Israel must carry over into the New Testament Church.
Do you not know that those who are employed in the temple service get their food from
the temple and those who serve at the altar share in the sacrificial offerings?
In the same way, the Lord commanded that those who proclaim the gospel should get their
living by the gospel, 1 Corinthians 9, 13, through 14.
Paul appeals to the pattern established by the Levitical priesthood while we have started
our investigation of ministers and money with the words of Christ and the acts of Paul.
This will take us back to the earliest pages of the Bible to see how God provided for
his laborers.
The law of Moses specifies the Levites received the food from the Lord's food offering.
Numbers 18, 8 through 20, Deuteronomy 18, 1 through 5.
Everything contributed but not burned becomes the possession of the sons of Aaron.
The Leviticus 2, 1 through 3, 7, 33 to 35.
Similarly to the contributions of the food offerings, the same book of law records the
right of the Levites to the Tithes composed of the produce of the land and other valuable
materials.
Numbers 18, 21 through 24.
While the tribe as a whole only nominally inherits the food offerings, the Tiths are in fact
shared this broadly.
On one hand, it appears that this transaction between the citizens at large and the priestly
tribe constitutes an expression of obligation of the people of Israel to the Levites.
It is repeatedly term a perpetual due from the former party to the latter.
Numbers 18, 8, 11, 19.
And in practical terms, this due is given directly to the priests.
Deuteronomy 18, 3.
However, the transaction is not primarily horizontal as may be easily recognized from
its designation as an offering to the Lord.
And the passages cited above, the sacrifices are called the contributions made to me, the
Lord, Numbers 18, 8, and the Lord's food offerings, Deuteronomy 18, 1.
The Lord likewise labels the Tithes a contribution to the Lord, Numbers 18, 24.
While the Tith and offerings are given to the Lord, the book of Numbers also says they are
given by the Lord, Numbers 18, 8, 12, 19, 21, 24.
These two primary directions of flow must control our understanding of the secondary direction
of flow.
The Israelites give to the Levites, but more importantly, the Israelites give to God who
in turn gives to the Levites.
After all, we would not imagine the people of Israel making their sacrifices to mere men.
To speak of resources passing from man to man simply abbreviates the larger transaction.
As the Lord says to the Levites in Numbers 18, 12, "The first fruits of what they give to
the Lord, I give to you."
Note that the expressed significance of the phrase "the Lord is their inheritance," resides
in this arrangement between the Levites and their Israelite brothers.
Numbers 18, 20, C.F. Deuteronomy 18, 1 through 2.
On one hand, this simply acknowledges what we have already identified.
The Lord provides for the Levites.
On another hand, it shows the exclusivity of this mode of support.
It is not merely that the Levites are to have the Lord as an inheritance, receiving from
the contributions, but they are to have no other inheritance.
The law of Moses permits the priest to receive co-labor, that which is offered to the Lord,
but forbids reciprocity.
Consequently, in Israel's times of faithlessness, i.e. when they do not co-labor, the Levites
languish, C.F. Deuteronomy 1427, Nehemiah 1310.
Perhaps the Levites may find other means of sustaining themselves, but in the context of
their ministry, the Levites forfeit the typical modes of sustenance enjoyed by other tribes.
For the sake of the divine blessing, they do not engage in property accrual, and they do
not exchange their services for payment.
When this model is violated, and a priest accepts offerings directly, he essentially puts
himself in the place of God.
As a divinely appointed broker, he disseminates the Lord's blessings through the work of ministry,
but then robs from the Lord what is owed in return.
Such was the sin of Hophany of Phineas, the corrupt sons of Samuel, who took raw meat before
it had been offered to the Lord.
First Samuel 2, 12th through 17.
This model keenly foreshadows the tensions and resolutions we have seen in the Gospels.
Jesus forbids payment for ministry, reciprocity, but insists that workers are to receive from
other members of the kingdom as wages from God, co-labor.
False metaphors.
In addition to his reference to the Levitical priesthood, Paul makes several other analogies
that exhibit the same pattern of mediated obligation.
Who serves as a soldier at his own expense?
Who plants a vineyard without eating any of its fruit?
Or who tends a flock without getting some of the milk?
Do I say these things on human authority?
Does not the law say the same?
Or does written in the law of Moses?
You shall not muzzle an ox when it treads out the grain.
Is it for oxen that God is concerned?
Does he not certainly speak for our sake?
It was written for our sake because the plowman should plow in hope and the thresher, thresh,
in hope of sharing the crop.
First Corinthians 9, 7-10.
While an initial reading may lead one to imagine Paul describing a direct obligation
between man and minister, a brief contemplation of his various metaphors revealed that, in each
case, the obligation is mediated.
And each, the one who gives is not the employer who contractually pays, but simply the source
of material provision used to supply the laborer.
And each, the one who gives is not primarily obligated to the laborer, but to the laborer's
employer.
The vine does not supply out of obligation to the vine dresser, and the citizen does not
supply out of obligation to the soldier.
The former supplies out of obligation to the owner, and the latter out of obligation to
the king.
Representing the Lord, the owner and the king ultimately reward the laborer by a sorted
means of provision.
Likewise, the laborer commissioned by God does not ultimately receive his pay from those
to whom he ministers, even if he receives it at their hands.
His just reward is granted by God through human means.
His just reward is granted through co-labor, not reciprocity.
Widows
This passage leads us to another parallel.
The church's provision for widows.
The connection may not be immediately obvious, but in 1 Timothy 5, Paul once again cites
the ox and the law of Moses, along with the words of Christ in order to illustrate the nature
of the church's obligation to ministers.
Let the elders who rule well be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor
in preaching and teaching.
For the scripture says, "You shall not muzzle an ox when it treads out the grain, and
the laborer deserves his wages."
In the New Testament, the term "honor" to "may" in Greek, frequently denotes price
or value.
CF Matthew 27, 6 through 9, Acts 4, 34, 5, 2 through 3.
As in English, where we speak of the honorarium paid to a speaker, some take this injunction
of double honor to mean that those elders who preach and teach should receive double
the pay received by other elders.
However, notice that the verse says no such thing.
Rather, it says all elders who rule well should be counted worthy of double honor.
Those who preach and teach are simply exemplars among the single group.
So if the term "double" does not imply a comparison between teaching and non-teaching
elders, what does it compare?
The key to this is found earlier in the chapter where Paul commands that another demographic
in the church receive honor.
Honor widows who are truly widows.
Let a widow be enrolled if she is not less than 60 years of age having been the wife of
one husband and having a reputation for good works.
If she has brought up children, as shown hospitality, has washed the feet of saints, has cared
for the afflicted, and has devoted herself to every good work.
Verse Timothy 5-3 9-10
Paul instructs Timothy to honor, to Molo in Greek, the widows.
That is, he should enroll them in some program where they will receive regular financial support
in correlation with their service to the church.
However, one would not imagine that the widows are being paid in direct exchange for their
works.
With this were the case.
The exclusion of widows with families would be unjust, verse Timothy 4-5.
"Rather, and their need, they are to be honored as servants of God by less needy servants
of God."
That is, the church does not find itself directly obligated to widows for their service, otherwise
they would pay all widows, but finds itself obligated to God who commands its needy servants,
be spared the shame of destitution.
Even that Paul relates the honoring of widows to the honoring of elders, this triangle of obligation
must shape our understanding of how church leaders are to be compensated.
The notion of co-lapur, present in the support of widows, must be present in the support of elders.
Jerusalem
Back in 1 Corinthians 9, between the little bitical priesthood and the other six analogies, Paul
makes the following comment.
If we have so-and-spiritual things among you, is it too much if we reap material things
from you?
1 Corinthians 9-11.
This bear is remarkable similarity to something the apostle says regarding the Jerusalem collection,
a financial collection among Gentile churches for the poor in Jerusalem.
For the Gentile churches were pleased to do it, and indeed they owe it to the church in
Jerusalem.
Or if the Gentiles have come to share in their spiritual blessings, they also ought to be
of service to them in material blessings.
Romans 1527
By using the same language to discuss these issues, Paul frames the Jerusalem collection as
a matter of ministerial support.
This leaves us with one more analogous triangle to examine.
Paul regards the Gentiles as deaders who owe the Jews, yet he treats the collection as
an act of worship, demonstrating immediate obligation owed primarily to God.
For example, he orders that people gather for this offering on the Christian day of worship,
the first day of the week, 1 Corinthians 1612, 1 Corinthians 162.
Furthermore, he describes the offering with vocabulary, Greek, La Torgia, that indicates
a religious service.
Romans 1527
In fact, in 2 Corinthians offering a primary motivation for participation in the collection,
Paul points to the Father's gift of the Son and the Son's willing sacrifice of his life.
2 Corinthians 8.9
CF 913
In other words, the Gentiles owe this gift to the Lord and are to offer it by sharing
it with his needy servants.
It is a religious sacrifice rendered to God rather than to the Jews, just as it generates
thanks to God rather than to the Gentiles, 2 Corinthians 9, 11 through 12.
There exists a real obligation here between Gentile and Jew, but the Lord mediates that
obligation.
The Gentiles do not give the payment to the Jews for services performed, but offer
co-labor a mutual facilitation of kingdom sustenance.
Conclusion
In 1 Corinthians 9, Paul confirms the pattern of mediated obligation that we saw in the
first two chapters.
Through various analogies of nature and society, he unmistakably replicates his triangle.
Additionally, he draws the analogy more directly when he illustrates the nature of this obligation
with the Levitical priesthood and the church in Jerusalem.
And the next chapter, we will see how Paul addresses the importance of this mediated obligation
with his use of the term burden.
However, if at this point you are eager to learn more about practical application of
the Dory Imprinciple, feel free to look through chapters 11 through 14 before continuing.
End of chapter 3